# Authentication
Authentication is the act of verifying a proposed identity. In a digital context, authentication is used for accessing websites, verifying data and users, among other things. Recently the majority of the web started being encrypted, and this encryption is usually done through the use of 'public encryption key certificates' in order to verify the identity and authenticity of a website. Similarly when data is being authenticated, the origin and the integrity of the data is confirmed and validated. One of the ways this can be done, is by using an arrangement of public keys, private keys, and checksums to discern whether the data has been tampered with or somehow been corrupted in transit. 

In addition, user authentication plays a large role in modern society. The reason being that to navigate in a modern society people are required to have access to digital services and resources, be it in a private or professional context. This is due to the fact that many of the essential aspects of modern life have become digitized, such as banking, communication, and even workflows in companies. The reason that it is vital to authenticate users is because of the sensitive data that is often contained within an account. Whether it is private social media accounts, or networks and servers with company secrets. Unprotected devices are a huge concern for both the private as well as the professional sector, as these can contain sensitive data that is vulnerable to being stolen, misappropriated, or misused in another fashion, if they are not protected by a means of authentication.

Traditionally a username-password configuration is widely used for authentication, and it is considered to be a very powerful tool of authentication, but it also places a lot of faith in the users, since users are required to make longer and more complex passwords. The reason being that shorter and simple passwords are easier to guess. However, this faith in users is somewhat misplaced as the majority of users are reluctant to make complex passwords, refrain from reusing them, and change them periodically. 

User authentication is an interesting topic, and therefore the report will focus solely on the authentication of users. In choosing the topic of user authentication, it is important to understand its application in practice. Before authenticating the identity of the user, it is common to determine whether the request is coming from an actual person or a computer. This is typically done by using CAPTCHA's, which work by giving the user a task to complete that a computer cannot. If the CAPTCHA is passed, the user is presented with an authentication method of which they will have to pass to successfully log in. It is also possible to chain multiple authentication methods together in order to increase the security, which is called multi-factor authentication.

Seeing that the traditional way of authenticating users, namely the username-password configuration, is not typically used in an optimal way, and thereby not as safe as it could be. It begs the question of what other means of authenticating users exist, and how these methods of authentication compare to each other. All of this leads to the initiating problem:

Which user authentication methods exists, and what are their strengths and weaknesses
